Title: Frequent errors are the worst: robustness to individual failures in collective foraging

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 56

Markdown Content:
Full title: Frequent errors are the worst: robustness to individual failures in collective foraging 

Author names: Chinmay Hemant Joshi * and Anna Dornhaus **  

> 1

Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, U.S. 

Correspondence: *chjoshi@arizona.edu 

Funding 

Funding was provided by DARPA SBIR 162-005, NSF IOS 3014230, and NSF ABI 3019760. This research was developed with funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and has been approved for public release, distribution unlimited. The views, opinions, and/or findings expressed are those of the author and should not be interpreted as representing the official views or policies of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. 

Data availability and model documentation 

A detailed model description written in the format recommended for individual-based models by 

Grimm et al. (2006, 2010 & 2020)  [85–87]  and a detailed parameter table can be found in 

Supplementary file S1. Additional graphs and result tables are in the Supplementary file S2. The annotated NetLogo model file and R scripts can be found in the supplementary materials, and in a Github repository accompanying the paper (link: 

https://github.com/dornhaus/CommunicationModel ). 

1

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Author contributions 

Conceptualization: Chinmay Hemant Joshi and Anna Dornhaus 

Data curation: Chinmay Hemant Joshi and Anna Dornhaus 

Formal analysis: Chinmay Hemant Joshi and Anna Dornhaus 

Funding acquisition: Anna Dornhaus 

Investigation: Chinmay Hemant Joshi 

Methodology: Chinmay Hemant Joshi and Anna Dornhaus 

Software: Chinmay Hemant Joshi and Anna Dornhaus 

Supervision : Anna Dornhaus 

Visualization: Anna Dornhaus 

Validation: Anna Dornhaus 

Writing – Original Draft Preparation : Chinmay Hemant Joshi and Anna Dornhaus 

Writing – Review & Editing : Chinmay Hemant Joshi and Anna Dornhaus 

2

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Abstract 

The collective behavior of complex systems emerges from the actions and interactions of their individual components. But what if these individuals make mistakes, or deviate from behavior tuned to lead to collective success? Here, we explore the effects of individual errors on collective outcomes. We investigate in particular whether information flow among individuals exacerbates or mitigates such individual failures. We use an agent-based, spatially explicit model inspired by collective foraging in social insects. Social insect colonies forage for food with autonomous workers who search for and exploit resources around the central nest, as well as share information about discovered resources. We find that the errors that have the most chances of occurring had the strongest impacts: for example, false positive detections can occur at any time during search, and each such error derailed exploration activity. Similarly, forgetting errors are potentially frequent and detrimental to resource exploitation. Despite the fact that communication inherently may narrow the breadth of information used by a colony, we found, in contrast, that it enhanced spatial exploration in our model. Communication in our model also reduced the effects of individual errors, instead of permitting erroneous information to spread. Our model thus illustrates that communication plays a central role in error management in complex systems, and that the evolution of communication systems in social insects may be shaped by selection on exploration and error mitigation as well as on efficient food retrieval. 

3

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Introduction 

In many complex adaptive systems, the behavior of individual units can only be understood in the context of their effect on the system as a whole. This is true, for example, for genes in a genome, cells in a multicellular organism, or workers in a social insect colony: in all cases, 

selection is primarily at the level of the collective  [1–3] . Social insect colonies consist of a few 

reproductive queens and several (sometimes thousands) sterile workers that cooperatively 

perform various tasks such as foraging  [4,5] . Even though queens control the reproduction in the 

colony, they do not have control over individual worker behavior; workers make independent 

decisions about where, when, and what to do, based on personal and social information  [4–6] . In 

resource collection in particular, workers called foragers search for resources  [7–10] , and 

transport them to the nest  [8] . They may communicate about the location, type, or quality of 

these resources with nestmates, and recruit others  [6,11,12] .

Like any other cognitive system, workers may make mistakes. These mistakes can stem 

from limitations in discerning rewarding and unrewarding stimuli  [13] , interference due to 

conflicting memories  [14]  or erroneous merging of related memories  [15] , inability to avoid 

responding to unrewarding stimuli due to innate biases  [16] , or noise causing errors in decision 

making  [17] . We categorize the resulting potential errors based on the type of information 

affected: individual workers may falsely detect (or identify/classify) a non-existing resource 

(‘false positive’  [18] ), or they may fail to detect an existing one (‘false negative’  [19] ). Workers 

may forget an already-discovered resource location  [20,21] , or misremember it (thus returning to 

an incorrect location  [14] ). They may make an error in the sending or receiving of a 

communication signal (‘transmission error’ [22,23] ). 

4

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

These errors can potentially extend well beyond the individual worker through communication, if erroneous information is spread through the colony. Such spread, or 

misinformation cascades, can lead to bad collective decisions  [24,25] . Misinformation cascades 

and their effects are well documented across different animals, including humans  [26–28] . Since 

communication in social insects can lead to positive feedback loops (amplification of and focus 

on a limited subset of information  (Lanan et al., 2012) ), they may be less likely to escape such 

bad decisions once a sizable proportion of the group is committed  [30,25] . Erroneous 

information spread via communication signals may be particularly problematic if individual 

workers have fixed responses to stereotyped signals  [31] , and hence may have limited cognitive 

flexibility to ignore erroneous or outdated recruitment signals ( [16] ; but see:  [32,33] .

Communication and errors may alter that process in far-reaching ways, for example by symmetry 

breaking  [34–36] , altered exploration vs exploitation patterns  [37–40] , and uneven distribution of 

search effort  [41,42] .

However, social insects have also been shown to avoid or mitigate errors through a 

variety of ways. Workers can be flexible about both reacting to conspecific signals  [43,44]  and 

evaluating their reliability  [45–47] . Workers may also repeatedly sample the same signal to 

reduce transmission error  [48] , or combine information from several sources (both personal 

[49,50] , and social  [51,52] ). In addition, insect foragers tend not to amplify information unless 

they have individually verified it  [43,44,53] . They may stop recruitment to suboptimal or 

dangerous locations by producing negative (repelling) signals  [54,55] , and by recruiting to 

alternative resource locations  [53,56] . Therefore, the presence of communication among 

nestmates brings with it both the possibility of improved information collection and that of amplification of misinformation. 

5

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

This paper uses a modeling approach to advance our understanding of how individual-level errors may affect collective performance. We investigated the effects of five different types of individual-level failures (false positive or false negative detection, wrong memory, forgetting, and transmission errors) on collective foraging. We employed an agent-based, spatially-explicit simulation model implemented in NetLogo to answer the following questions: (1) What effects do different types of errors have on different aspects of collective foraging performance? (2) Does communication mitigate or amplify the effects of individual errors? 

To quantify the impact of individual errors on collective performance, one has to identify which dimensions of collective behavior matter. Here, we assume that the main objective of a foraging social insect colony is to maximize resource collection (i.e., rate of collection). However, foraging consists of two qualitatively different activities: search and retrieval, often 

termed ‘exploration’ and ‘exploitation’  [9]  . Exploration entails searching for resources and 

assessing their quality; exploitation implies collecting resources from known locations options (it is exploitation that is thought to primarily benefit from communication, although see Discussion). These two aims, search and retrieval, are typically seen as trading off with each 

other, as individuals can spend their time on only one of them  [7,57] , and colonies can allocate 

workers to one or the other activity  [7,58,8] . The optimal allocation of time to exploration vs 

exploitation is the subject of much research  [57,59,60]  and is thought to depend, among other 

things, on the spatial and temporal distribution of resources in the environment  [12,34,61] . To 

capture these different aspects of foraging, we separately quantify colony performance in exploration and exploitation as well as several metrics that contribute to these outcomes. 

6

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In the study of robustness to failures, what is often measured is not only performance at some arbitrary level of perturbation (or error frequency), but the ‘shape’ (functional form) of 

how performance declines with increasing perturbation or failure rate  [62–65] . For example, a 

concave, initially slowly declining shape is sometimes called ‘graceful failure’ in engineering -one would want small problems to have small impact on overall performance, and only get a full system failure at high rate of component failure (whereas a convex shape implies failing components have an immediate, strong impact on system performance). We ask to what degree our simulated colonies achieve resilience up to high rates of different types of errors. 

Social insect colony foraging has been previously modeled using individual-based simulations. This method is particularly suitable when exploring systems that depend on heterogeneity in space, time, or across individuals; all three of these are expected to be critical to social insect collective behavior. For example, individual-based models are frequently used to determine effects of various spatio-temporal resource distributions, particularly on benefits of 

communication  [66–69,61,70] . Other models focus on spatial patterns in forager distributions, 

particularly in the context of symmetry breaking  [29,71]  or polydomy (the colony uses multiple 

nest sites)  [72,41] . These and other individual-based models  [73,74]  have in common the 

different information states of individual foragers, the consequences of which are difficult to model with population-based models, and which also motivates our use of an individual-based model here. 

Our aim here is to improve general understanding of the impact of different types of individual-level errors on complex system behavior; however, we used parameter values approximating empirical data from foraging social insect colonies, to capture the ecological and physiological constraints in this system. 

7

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Results 

Impact of different error types on overall performance 

The median number of resource units collected was lowered by all types of errors under all communication systems, but the magnitude of the performance decline differed among error types (Fig. 1, top six panels; p<0.001 in Kruskal-Wallis tests for each communication type, sample size range = 27929-50276 per test, Table S2). Pairwise comparisons in Dunn’s post hoc tests showed this to be a significant reduction in all but transmission errors, which caused the smallest median decline in performance, a decline which was only significant for the ‘beacon’ communication system. The strongest decline in resources collected was seen with false positive errors, which caused a median of 100% decline relative to the respective simulations with no errors (for all communication types); forgetting errors were similarly detrimental (median 83-97% decline), and false negative sensing and wrong target memory had intermediate effects. 

8

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 1: Total resources collected by the colony, separated by communication type and shown against error type in the top six panels; the bottom six panels show the same data, but separated by error type against communication type. Box plots show the median (solid black line), quartiles (colored box), and range (whiskers). Numbers on top of each panel indicate sample sizes (number of simulation runs). Letters at the bottom of each panel show Dunn’s post hoc test results (boxes that do not share the same letter are significantly different from each other, p<0.05 in pairwise comparison). Percentages above whiskers indicate relative change in median performance compared to median without error (top six panels) or without communication 

9

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(bottom six panels) (white boxes). Errors generally led to decreased performance, while communication led to increased performance. 

The role of communication 

When comparing these performance measures across communication systems instead of across error types, we find that for all error types, the communication type significantly affected the impact errors had on the number of resource units collected (Fig. 1, bottom six panels; p<0.001 for all Kruskal-Wallis tests, sample size range = 28802-99974 per test, Table S3). In most but not all cases, communication improved performance, sometimes dramatically (up to 510% compared to no communication). The near-total collapse of foraging with false positive sensing errors was not prevented by any communication type, and the impact of ‘trail’ communication was generally low (Dunn’s post hoc tests for individual pairwise comparisons). With forgetting errors, performance was also very low regardless of communication type, although here the only negative effect of communication was found (for the ‘blackboard’ type, where performance with communication was even worse than without). However, in all other cases, the effect of communication was positive, indicating that communication typically served to mitigate, not exacerbate, the impact of errors. With false negative sensing and wrong target memory errors, the benefit of communication was in fact even higher when errors were present than when they were not, and colonies with direct, central-place, or blackboard communication with these errors outperformed colonies with no errors and no communication. Overall, this shows that in this collective behavior scenario, misinformation cascades do not seem to impact performance, if they occur at all. Instead, communication rescues collective outcomes from individual errors. 

10 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The shape of robustness 

The impact of errors as reported above was evaluated for a single, standard magnitude and probability of errors. However, an important trait of robust systems is their ability to fail ‘gracefully’, i.e., prevent performance collapse at small error rates (instead ideally declining 

gradually and initially slowly with increasing failures)  [62,65] . We thus evaluated the 

performance of colonies with increasing error probability, for all communication and error types (Fig. 2). All error types led to a reduction in resource units collected with increasing error probability (with the exception of transmission errors). However, the two most detrimental error types, false positive sensing and forgetting errors, show an immediate steep decay in performance (in the convex region of the S-curve over the entire error probability range), whereas wrong target memory and false negative errors show an initially slow decline, and transmission errors, if showing a decline at all, remain in the concave region of the S-curve. This pattern remained qualitatively the same across all communication types. 

11 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 2: Relative performance (resource units collected relative to the median resource units collected with no errors) plotted against error probability for each combination of error and communication type (as boxplots with 100 bins from 0 to 1). Red lines indicate fits of inverted hill function (S curve starting at 1 and decreasing) to the raw data. The ‘shape’ of the fit indicates whether performance declined quickly even for minimal errors, or remained steady up to higher error frequencies. False positive and forgetting errors show a steep, convex drop in performance, while transmission errors show a minimal, concave decrease. Wrong target memory and false negative errors exhibit a complete S-curve. The estimation process did not converge for 

12 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

transmission errors for no communication, beacon and trail communication, presumably because performance either initially increased or did not drop over the range of error probabilities (by definition no drop should be present for transmission errors under no communication, top left panel). 

Exploration vs. exploitation 

To better understand how errors impacted colony performance, we evaluated colonies both in 

terms of their ‘exploration’ and ‘exploitation’ (or search and retrieval)  [9,57] . Exploration can be 

framed as a combination of investment in search (i.e., forager-time spent searching), area allocation or avoidance of overlap between searchers (i.e., amount of new area explored given a particular investment in search), and search efficiency (ability to actually discover resource patches given a particular area searched). These three measures combine to give the total number of resource patches discovered, a measure of successful search (Fig. 3). For all these performance measures, across all communication systems, error types differed in their impact (all Kruskal-Wallis tests p<0.05; Tables S4-S7; see Dunn’s post hoc tests for pairwise comparisons, Fig. 3). The severity order of the error types for exploration remains the same as for overall performance (compare Fig. 1 & Fig. 3, left column), even though some errors actually improved mutual avoidance of searchers (3rd column in Fig. 3) and investment in search (4th column in Fig. 3). Interestingly, despite the fact that overall performance is similarly impacted by false positive sensing and forgetting errors, false positive sensing clearly has the strongest impact on exploration: with this error type, investment in search drops to almost nothing (Fig. 3, right column, rightmost box), and so does search success (number of resources discovered, leftmost column). 

13 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Exploitation (or retrieval, measured as the amount of resource units collected per resource patches discovered) is the product of investment in retrieval (i.e., forager-time spent collecting) and collection efficiency (i.e., amount of resource units retrieved per time invested) (Fig. 4). In our simulation, the time invested in retrieval was much lower than the time invested in search (compare the y-axis units in the right columns in Fig. 3 and 4; also see Fig. S1 and S2 in supplementary material). The overall exploitation performance across error types differed from the order in exploration and overall performance impacts (all Kruskal-Wallis tests p<0.05; Tables S8-S10; see Dunn’s post hoc tests for pairwise comparisons, Fig. 4). In particular, forgetting impacted exploitation the strongest, and wrong target memory also had a higher impact on exploitation, compared to other error types, than on exploration. In addition, communication types interacted with error types to affect their impact. 

14 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 3: Ability of colonies to explore the environment, here measured as number of resource patches discovered (Exploration), which is a product of Search efficiency (resource patches discovered/proportion of total area explored), Avoidance among searchers (proportion of total area explored/proportion of time spent searching), and Investment in search (proportion of time spent searching). Box plots show the median (solid black line), quartiles (colored box), and range (whiskers). Numbers on top of each panel indicate sample sizes (number of simulation runs). Letters at the bottom of each panel show Dunn’s post hoc test results (boxes that do not share the same letter are significantly different from each other, p<0.05 in pairwise comparison). 

15 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Percentages above whiskers indicate relative change in median performance compared to median without error (white boxes). The map contained a total of 100 resource patches. Errors severely negatively impact exploration, particularly in search efficiency; false positive sensing errors also strongly impact investment in search. 

16 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 4: Ability of colonies to exploit discovered resources, here measured as collected resource units/resource patches discovered (Exploitation), which is a product of Collection efficiency (resource units collected/proportion of time spent collecting) and Investment in exploitation (proportion of time spent collecting). Box plots show the median (solid black line), quartiles (colored box), and range (whiskers). Numbers on top of each panel indicate sample sizes (number of simulation runs). Letters at the bottom of each panel show Dunn’s post hoc test 

17 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

results (boxes that do not share the same letter are significantly different from each other, p<0.05 in pairwise comparison). Percentages above whiskers indicate relative change in median performance compared to median without error (white boxes). Each resource patch contained 5 resource units (thus maximum collection efficiency is 5). The impact of different error types on exploitation is very different from that on exploration; forgetting most strongly impacts resource collection efficiency. The time investment in collection is much lower than that in search. 

What drives the impact of errors? 

What mechanisms can explain these impacts? Overall, the number of resource units collected is tightly predicted by the number of resources discovered (Fig. 5, panel h), indicating that with most errors (and also most communication systems, Figs. S3-7), foraging performance is limited by exploration more than exploitation in our model. Some variation is also explained by the stochastic variation on how close resources are placed to the nest (panel d, note the overall negative slope) and how quickly the first resource is discovered (negative slope in panel b - this is a result of a combination of stochastic variation in search paths and resource distribution, and the search efficiency of colonies with particular error and communication types). 

The two most detrimental errors show distinct differences in collective behavior. While both false positive sensing and forgetting achieve much lower success (common y-axis in Fig. 5) even for a similar range of time to first discovery, false positive sensing has foragers spend a lot of time attempting to collect resources (panel g), despite almost no resources being discovered (panel h). The false positive sensing error implies that foragers who are searching may ‘detect’ a resource that is not there, and return to the nest with this ‘target’ in their memory. On returning to the location, they fail to find anything at the location, and resume exploring. This error thus leads 

18 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

to frequently short search trips (purple points in Fig. 5, panel a) and thus short search distances (panel i) and little area explored (panel c). There are many (attempted) collection trips (panel e), but little to show for it (since there was no resource there in the first place, panel g), and any of the few resources that are found (panel h) are a short distance from the nest (panel j); the same issues occur with or without communication (compare to Fig. S3). Forgetting errors on the other hand generate a similarly strong impact, but by a different mechanism: foragers who already have information about a resource ‘forget’ this information and enter the exploring state. This leads to a lower number of resource units collected per resource discovered (blue points in Fig. 5, panel h; also see ‘forgetting’ box in left column in Fig. 4). It is also notable that the range of time spent searching (panel a), area explored (panel c), and exploited resource distance (panel j) for forgetting is not dramatically different from errors that lead to much lower impact - however, with other errors, more time searching and searching farther away positively correlate with foraging success (but do not when foragers ‘forget’ about these discovered resources). In addition, colonies are less able to capitalize on communication (all outcomes for forgetting look more similar to the ones without communication: compare blue points in Fig. 5 to Fig. S3). 

19 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 5: Example, for the central-place communication type, of the impact of errors on different measures of colony performance and behavior (for other communication types see supplementary materials). Boxplots underneath scatterplots show x-axis value distributions for each error type; y-axis (performance) distributions for each error type are shown in panel I (and are identical across all scatterplots; panel I matches corresponding data in Fig. 1(top six panels)). Dark horizontal lines show high point densities; since resources occurred in ‘clusters’ of 10 resource patches carrying 5 resource units each, colonies that emptied exactly one resource 

20 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

cluster collected 50 resource units (or multiples of 50 for multiple clusters). Intermediate values indicate simulation runs in which some resource clusters were not fully exploited. 

21 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint Discussion 

Individuals making errors are detrimental to collective success; but we found that the exact type of error that individuals make radically affects its impact. Not only is this true quantitatively (in that some error types are more detrimental), but also qualitatively: first, some errors cause more ‘graceful’, i.e., gradual, failure whereas others lead quickly to collapse in performance; and second, different errors have impacts in different parts of the process, affecting its interaction with the environment as well as with communication strategy. We also asked whether communication in general is likely to exacerbate or mitigate the effect of errors on collective performance, given its potential to amplify both correct information and misinformation. We found that communication almost always improved foraging success, including in the presence of errors. Moreover, in some cases, communication had an even bigger impact when errors were present, thus mitigating the negative impact of errors. Lastly, we found several surprising effects we had not specifically looked for. First, errors did not generally increase effective exploration, nor did communication reduce exploration. Instead, the relationship between exploration and exploitation was generally positive (Fig. S1). Second, in a perhaps related finding, foraging success was almost entirely explained by ability to discover resources, and the actual collection of food from ‘known’ resources was apparently neither costly nor difficult unless foragers made memory-related errors. Third, despite the strong positive effect of communication, there was barely an effect of transmission errors, indicating perhaps that the benefit of communication was driven more by its effect on activating foragers and drawing them further from the nest rather than in precise communication of location. We discuss each of these findings in detail below. 

22 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Error types that have more chances of occurring have more impact 

What explains the differences in impact across the different error types? We had used the same ‘error probability’ (per individual and timestep) for each error type. However, this does not mean that all errors occurred equally frequently overall, since each error could only occur when foragers were in a specific state. Foragers could falsely detect a food source (false positive errors) every timestep they were in the ‘exploring’ state; they could forget a remembered food location every time step in the ‘inactive’, ‘exploiting’, or ‘returning forager’ states. However, false negative detections could only occur when an ‘exploring’ forager actually came in sensing range of a resource patch, transmission errors only occurred on signaling, and ‘wrong target memory’ only occurred at the moment that foragers committed a new resource location to memory. Foragers spent significantly more time in the ‘exploring’ than the ‘exploiting’ (or any other active) state (Figs. 4 & 5, right columns), meaning that the actual number of times a ‘false positive detection’ occurred was likely much higher than that for any other error. Wrong target memory errors, on the other hand, were likely rarer than other errors. It is striking that the two most detrimental errors, false positive sensing and forgetting, are the ones that can occur in the most common behavioral states, ‘exploring’ and ‘inactive’. In our simulations, the impact of errors on the amount of resource collected was thus likely explained in large part by such differences in the number of times each error occurred. 

Decisions that occur frequently are thus likely to be under stronger selection to get right 

than decisions that occur rarely, everything else being equal  [88,89] . With respect to errors 

during foraging, false positive and forgetting errors are therefore more likely to be either avoided and/or mitigated in foraging animals than, for example, false negative sensing, wrong target memory, or transmission errors. There is an inherent tradeoff in minimizing false positive and 

23 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

false negative errors in any decision-making system  [13] . Animals minimize one error type over 

another depending on the cost incurred due to these errors. For example, individuals in a group initiate false alarm signals at a higher rate to warn other group members when it is difficult to detect predators (under cloudy or low light conditions for instance, almost 4-6 false signals over 

1 correct signal)  [26,28] , or avoid valuable food sources that typically have cryptic ambush 

predators (5% false positive rates in bees erroneously avoiding visiting flowers of a certain color/type that were associated with cryptic predators in the past, but do not have the predators at 

present  [90,91] ). Such false alarms can be costly in terms of costs of responding, reduced 

foraging efficiency, or opportunity cost  [28,91] ; but failing to react when a predator is present 

can lead to total fitness loss. In such scenarios, animals are thought to prioritize avoiding false 

negative errors over false positive ones  [92] . However, our results are a reminder that for the 

same probability of a particular error occurring, given the right condition is present, if the item to be detected is actually rare, false positive errors are likely to vastly outnumber false negative ones. 

While ‘frequent errors are the worst’ may seem somewhat obvious in hindsight, this is exactly the kind of insight that models, by forcing clearer, more quantitative thinking, can 

provide  [93,94] . In fact it is based on the same phenomenon as the ‘medical test paradox’ 

(referring to the fact that false positives of a diagnostic test may vastly outnumber true positives 

when a disease is generally rare) and the claim that ‘most research findings are false’  [95] . In all 

these cases, the tradeoff between false positive and false negative errors is shaped by the base probability of actual positive or negative events. 

24 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Robustness shape is characteristic of a given error type 

Robustness analysis allows us to quantify the system’s performance against increasing levels of perturbations. We generally define performance to be at 100% without errors, and expect it to decline to some low level at maximal error rate (typically to 0%, unless the function affected by the errors is not essential for overall performance). However, the ‘shape’ of this decline, i.e., how early and steeply performance decreases with increasing component failure rates, characterizes the robustness of a system and ultimately its ability to withstand typical levels of perturbation 

[62–65] . By quantifying the shape of a social insect colony’s robustness to individual errors, we 

illustrate the impact of such errors beyond any specific assumed error probability (which we had arbitrarily, and highly, set to 0.5 for most of the presented results). We show that for the most detrimental errors, performance declines steeply even for very low error probabilities, whereas system performance stays flat or declines only very gradually up to high error probabilities for other types of error (Fig. 2). 

Communication mitigated the effect of errors 

Information exchange is broadly seen as one of the primary benefits of high individual density 

[96] , and one of the key adaptations that make social insect colonies successful  [6,97,98] .

Communication in foraging in social insects is particularly well studied  [6,66,99,100] . However, 

the benefits of communication are surprisingly not always obvious  [66,100,101] . Empirical 

[100,102,103] , and modeling  [104,105]  studies have found a variety of costs of communication. 

A particularly general effect of communication is the potential for a narrowed spectrum of 

resources used (which may represent a benefit  [103,106]  or a cost  [66,107] ), or which results in 

symmetry breaking in extreme cases  [29,36] . Another possible cost of communication is the 

25 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

amplification of incorrect information, or ‘misinformation cascades’  [25,108] . The conditions in 

which misinformation spreads through social networks have received much attention in recent 

literature (e.g.,  [109,110] . Empirical studies have shown that social insects use a variety of 

mechanisms to evaluate or improve the quality of social information, from evaluating the 

reliability of multiple information sources and strong sensitivity to unreliable signallers  [45,47] 

to integrating over several signallers before important decisions with quorum thresholds  [111] .

Social insects generally also always personally evaluate information before further 

communicating it  [48,44,53] , and may use repellent signals to counteract what they perceive to 

be erroneous information  [54,55] .

However, in our study, we did not code any of these more sophisticated mechanisms for counteracting or buffering misinformation and misinformation cascades; we were interested in quantifying the potential impact of amplification of individual errors in the basic case of collective foraging with communication. Despite this, we did not find that communication decreased performance when individuals were error-prone, demonstrating that in this case, the mitigating effects of social information can be solely attributed to the fundamental design of the communication system itself. 

Errors do not universally increase exploration 

Individual errors, in the foraging literature, are often considered to be synonymous with choosing 

exploration over exploitation  [59,60] . Exploration could involve either choosing a resource 

presumed to be inferior (typically designated as ‘sampling’  [60] ) or movement to a new or 

previously unrewarding location (typically designated as search - [57,60] ). Either behavior is 

similar to ‘making errors’ in that the forager is not visiting the resource currently estimated to be 

26 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

most profitable. However, some degree of exploration is part of an optimal foraging strategy as it is necessary to collect (and update) information about the environment and the best options 

[9,57,60] . Similarly, errors in extracting information from communication signals are sometimes 

thought to be adaptive in preventing symmetry breaking and improving the breadth of resource 

use  [29,112] .

Here, however, we show that errors in many cases may in fact be universally detrimental to foraging, by causing time or energy costs that prevent foragers both from collecting food and collecting information. We measured several aspects of exploration (Fig. 3 and Figs 6 & S3-7). Almost universally, errors decreased performance even in terms of exploration, with one exception: transmission and wrong target memory errors (with blackboard, central-place, or direct communication) do seem to increase area explored per time invested, probably by sending searchers to new areas - perhaps similar to what had been proposed for honey bees in the ‘tuned 

error hypothesis’  [112] . Time invested in searching is also higher in several cases with errors 

compared to without errors. The reason that errors don’t generally increase exploration appears to be that most errors, instead of allowing foragers to explore novel areas, interrupt trips and cause foragers to stay closer to the nest, an area that tends to already have been thoroughly explored. In the case of wrong target memory, foragers instead are committed to reaching a particular patch, which may be some distance from the nest. Even when this specific patch does not contain a resource, this error thus draws foragers some distance from the nest, increasing exploration. The overall impact on foraging success is still negative in our simulations, presumably because resource patches already discovered are not fully exploited (panel h in Fig. 6 and S3-7), at least for the combination of error probability and resource distribution simulated here. As stated above and further discussed below, transmission errors had a very low impact 

27 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

across the board in our simulations. However, there is some indication that they also have the potential to increase exploration (e.g. increased search distance and area explored, panels c, h, 

and i in Fig. 6 and S3-7), as previously proposed in the literature  [29,112] .

In summary, we found, as expected, that different error types acted in different parts of the foraging process. As a consequence however, we show that errors cannot be interpreted as favoring exploration over exploitation in general. Instead, when errors lead foragers to return to the nest earlier, they can severely curtail both exploration and foraging success, in part because in collective central-place foragers, a key aspect of exploration is to move outside of the area of high density of searchers around the nest itself. Those particular errors that lead foragers to attempt foraging in areas away from the nest thus allow the foragers and the colony to expand exploration and collect new information, potentially benefiting foraging success in some environments. 

Exploration vs. exploitation under errors and communication 

Both the main benefit and the main cost of communication in collective foraging is that 

communication leads to targeted resource exploitation  [99,103,106,113,114] . Since exploitation 

typically trades off with exploration (e.g., search can either be depth-first or breadth-first  [9] ), 

communication is therefore thought to imply decreased resource exploration  [105,115–118] . It is 

thus surprising that we find increased exploration (as measured by resources discovered or area explored) with communication (Fig. 3), even without errors, likely primarily because communication drew foragers further away from the nest (panel i in Fig. S3 compared to Fig. 6 and Figs. S4-7 - note axis units). After communicating resources that were far from the nest became empty, this led foragers to start exploring at those distances, increasing overall 

28 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

exploration (both in terms of area and resources discovered). Without communication, searchers start from the nest itself, and thus are less likely to move into areas that have not yet been explored by other foragers from the same colony. 

In our model, resource patches did not differ in their inherent quality, merely in their distance to the nest. Communication is thought to improve the ability of a colony to select the 

best resources  [103] , and see above), an aspect of performance we did not explicitly measure 

here. Colonies are still foraging selectively in the sense that they forage on resources closer to the nest than the average distance of resources to the nest in the environment (compare panels j and d in Fig. 6 and S3-7). However, we found that foraging close to the nest in general is associated with errors and generally poor overall foraging performance, because it is linked to less exploration and fewer resources discovered overall. Other than the fact that in our simulations resource quality was homogeneous, travel costs for food collection seemed to be minimal (compare time spent on collecting food, Fig. 4, to time spent searching for it, Fig. 3). While we sought to use empirically-validated parameter values (e.g., for the range over which colonies foraged and the time costs of travel), it would be interesting to quantify, for specific 

social insect species and their expected resource distributions  [100,103] , and how the time and 

energy costs of exploration compare to those of exploitation. This is likely to inform the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation specifically with regard to whether colonies benefit from exploring further afield even at the cost of relatively long travel times. If long travel is not 

particularly costly  [106,119] , then the evolution of error management and communication may 

be affected primarily by the benefit of leading foragers to make long trips to reduce overlap 

among searchers  [120,121] .

29 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Overall, our model thus demonstrates that the amount of area explored is strongly dependent on processes that draw foragers away from the nest first, since areas close to the nest are likely to be explored by many individuals in any case. Errors may decrease movement ranges of foragers, reducing the area explored. This reframes the role of both errors and communication in the foraging process, as being strongly dependent on whether these factors act to promote effective exploration (e.g., far from the nest) in addition to whether they promote selection and exploitation of the highest quality resources. 

Pheromone-based communication did not perform well in our simulations 

We implemented two pheromone-based communication types, namely ‘beacon’ and ‘trail’. Neither performed as well, with or without errors, as the direct, central-place, and blackboard communication types. Trail communication, on the other hand, generally did not produce outcomes that differed from ‘no communication’ very successful foraging outcomes (Fig. 3-4 and Fig. S3-S4). It is possible that this was a direct consequence of the small colony size 

modeled here (n=50), which can limit the successful build-up of a pheromone trail  [76,122,123] ,

Pheromone trails typically require not only build-up but also continuous reinforcement: in addition to the number of foragers, the number of trips made to the food source is thus critical. Since we modeled food sources that were emptied after 5 trips, we thus may not have enabled sufficient repeat trips for foragers to generate and sustain successful trail recruitment (before the trail evaporates). The ‘beacon’ communication likely suffered from similar problems, but produced somewhat higher success, likely because it did draw foragers away from the nest (increasing area explored and search distance, comparing panels c and i in S11 with S8 and S12). In addition, the ‘beacon’ communication was less affected by the ‘forgetting’ error, likely 

30 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

because information was still contained in the environment even if foragers did not retain it in their memory. 

What do we learn from such a model 

The purpose of models in biology, in general, is typically to demonstrate a general principle 

[93,94] . Individual-based simulations, like any numerical models, can only make statements 

about specific scenarios (that are defined by the parameter values and other assumptions used 

[66,87,124] . However, this can be particularly useful when demonstrating that particular 

processes or outcomes are possible , especially when the assumptions of the model match the system under study reasonably well. In addition, models often illustrate principles that are not 

difficult in hindsight but that were not apparent from verbal descriptions of a system  [94] . Here, 

we modeled the behavioral rules and states of social insect foragers in a way that is identical or 

similar to other frequently used formal descriptions of them  [66,125,126] , and our specific 

parameter values are motivated by information from empirical studies (Table S1). What is new in our model is the inclusion of individual-level errors. We show that it is possible for such errors to disrupt the foraging process, and that such disruption, when the probability for error at the individual decision-point is equal, will depend on how frequently foragers find themselves at such decision points. This conclusion follows so directly that it should not require further justification; but it still was not obvious before the model demonstrated it (this is in fact often the 

benefit of models; e.g., see the famous case of Hardy- [94,127] ). 

Furthermore, our model demonstrates that in a complex system such as this one, non-intuitive and heterogeneous consequences of apparently similar processes are possible, in fact likely common. Specifically, we show that communication systems may interact with error 

31 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

types to produce results that differ both in magnitude and direction. Most importantly, we show that the common assumption that higher error levels generally equal more exploration and less exploitation is incorrect, and equally that the common assumption that communication always 

results in lower exploration is also incorrect; both of these principles are relevant broadly  [9] .

Conclusion 

Overall, using an agent-based modeling approach, we have shown that errors are detrimental to collective foraging and that communication can play an important role in mitigating the effects of errors. Importantly, our model illustrates that different error types may dramatically differ in their impact. A major driver of these differences seems to be that some errors simply have many more chances of occurring. We expect that sensory and cognitive systems evolve to prioritize minimizing such errors over others. Our model also demonstrates that not all errors are likely to increase exploration, and that spatial exploration in central place foragers depends on individuals having the chance and motivation to move far from the nest. Perhaps surprisingly, communication may increase rather than decrease spatial exploration for these reasons, because it draws foragers longer distances away from the nest, where they may search if initially exploited resources are emptied. These results suggest that the evolution of different communication systems in social insects may have been shaped not just by selection on improved exploitation of resources, but also by selection on exploration and error mitigation. Our model thus motivates further work, both empirical and theoretical, on the evolution of errors and error mitigation in individual and collective foraging. 

32 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Materials and Methods 

Model overview 

We developed an agent-based, spatially-explicit, continuous-space, discrete-time, stochastic model in NetLogo to simulate a social insect colony consisting of cooperating individuals (hereafter referred to as ‘foragers’). In the model, foragers collect resources from their environment using different communication types and are subject to different kinds of errors. 

Our model was implemented and run in NetLogo 6.3.0  [75]  on multiple machines, including a 

high-performance computing cluster at the University of Arizona that uses a Linux-based command line interface. We analyzed more than 250,000 simulation runs in total. For addressing the first and second objectives, we varied error type and communication type, and for addressing third objective, along with these two parameters, we also varied the error probability per individual and timestep. All other parameters were held constant. 

Agents in the model 

All simulations were run with 50 foragers and 100 resources (distributed in 10 clusters or 10 resources each, where each resource had a value of 5 trips worth of food); all parameters except for those of interest for the study were held constant at values judged to be broadly representative for social insect foraging (Table S1 in Supplementary file S1). 

The spatial and temporal scale of the model 

We simulated a two-dimensional grid with a coordinate system consisting of 300 x 300 patches, where each patch was defined as being 10 forager body lengths wide (despite Netlogo’s framing of ‘patches’, the coordinate system is continuous). Therefore, the world allowed a foraging range 

33 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

of up to 1500 forager body lengths away from the central nest. Before each simulation run began, all the foragers were placed in the nest, and foragers returned regularly to the nest with or without food (Fig. 1). Each simulation was run for 2000 timesteps, with each step defined as equivalent to ten seconds (~6 hrs of total simulated time per simulation). 

The foragers and their behavioral states, error types, and communication types. 

At any time, each forager was defined to be in one of five states as shown in Fig. 1. In addition to their behavioral state, foragers could also store one ‘target-patch’ in their memory - this is the location of the resource that they last visited. Foragers may update this ‘target-patch’ memory either by discovering or receiving information about a new resource location through communication. However, the memory is only updated if the new location is ‘better’, i.e., closer to the nest, than the location currently in memory (see Supplementary file S1 for more information). 

Error types were modeled to affect how foragers detect, remember, and/or transmit the information on resource locations. Each simulation implemented one of five different individual-level error types (or no errors) - false positive errors (falsely sensing presence of a resource on an empty patch), false negative errors (failing to detect an active resource that could have been perceived), forgetting (forgetting the memory of a remembered resource location), wrong target memory (remembering a wrong resource location) and transmission errors (communicating a wrong resource location). 

We use the term ‘communication type’ to refer to a type of information exchange characterized by which information is exchanged, and with what audience, irrespective of mechanistic details like signal modality. For example, some ants use pheromone trails to recruit 

34 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

nestmates to a food location; this type of communication essentially confers information about food location to a potentially unlimited number of receivers via a stigmergic signal, without 

requiring direct contact between individuals  [76] . The honey bee waggle dance, on the other 

hand, also allows communication of food location, but only to a very limited number of 

receivers, who have to encounter the forager at a specific time and place  [77] . We model 

communication like the waggle dance as ‘central place’ (exchange of information upon encounter of a forager and potential recruit at the nest), and pheromone trails as ‘trail’. Communication in our model is implemented as receiver-initiated where the receiver extracts the ‘target-patch’ location from the memory of the sender. We implemented five different communication ‘types’, as well as ‘no communication’: direct communication (communicate anywhere in the world upon encounter), central-place communication (communicate at the nest upon encounter), blackboard communication (the nest stores information on the currently best resource, and workers extract information this information at the nest), beacon communication (workers deposit a signal at the food source that can be perceived from a distance), and trail communication (pheromone trail laid by workers who have discovered resources, of uniform strength in straight line to nest). In each simulation run, foragers used only one of the six communication types. Detailed information on the specifics of the error and communication types can be found in the Supplementary material file S1. 

Simulation process overview 

Each simulation starts with a new randomly generated resource distribution and with all the foragers at the center of the map (the ‘nest’). Once the simulation starts, in each timestep, all foragers evaluate their behavior sequentially, potentially changing their state (Fig. 6), then 

35 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

communicate (if applicable, again independently and sequentially), then move (if applicable, again independently and sequentially). The patch variables and resource values are updated as and when the agents are on those patches or/and collect the resources. In the last timestep of each simulation run, a variety of output variables are calculated. We used NetLogo’s built-in 

BehaviorSpace function to run sets of simulations with varying inputs  [75] .

36 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 6: Behavior and states of agents (‘foragers’) in the simulation model. Possible state transitions are shown using solid lines. Foragers in the nest are inactive (yellow). If they have a resource location in their memory, they may leave and travel directly to this location (blue ‘exploiters’). If not, they may leave and search for a resource (red ‘explorers’). Once a resource is detected within their sensing radius, foragers remember this location, collect food from this resource, and return to the nest (green); upon arrival, they turn inactive (yellow) again. Traveling foragers (explorers or exploiters) may also probabilistically give up foraging and return to the nest (gray). Various error types may affect state transitions or memory content (shown using dotted lines). For more information on the transition probabilities, please see Table S1 in Supplementary file S1. 

37 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Response variables quantified 

We measured several outcomes of the collective foraging process: (1) overall foraging performance (total resource units collected), (2) exploration (resources discovered, resources discovered per unit area explored, area explored per unit time spent by foragers in searching, and Total forager-time spent searching), (3) exploitation (resource units collected per resource patch discovered, resources collected per unit time spent collecting resources, and time spent collecting resources per unit resource discovered), and (4) relative performances (resource units collected relative to the median resource units collected with no errors). See the ‘ Observation ’ section in Supplementary file S1 for more information. 

Statistical analyses 

All statistical tests were performed in RStudio using R 4.5.2  [78] . To analyze the effect of 

different error and communication types on the foraging performance measures described above, we kept the error-probability value constant (N= 244,987, error-probability = 0.5), and used Kruskal-Wallis tests followed by post-hoc Dunn tests. The rest of the simulations were used for analyzing the effect of varying error probabilities on the number of resources collected. We fitted an inverted hill function (with parameters K and n) over the raw data over the whole range of 

error probability values. Other than base R, we used the following packages- data.table  [79] ,

FSA  [80] , rcompanion  [81] , scales  [82] , tidyverse  [83] , and viridis  [84] .

38 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Acknowledgements 

We thank the University of Arizona HPC team, especially Sara Willis, for her help in streamlining the process of running jobs on the HPC clusters. We also thank Daniel Papaj, Judith Bronstein and Tanya Latty for their feedback on the manuscript. 

References 

1.  Hamilton WD. The genetical evolution of social behaviour. II. Journal of theoretical 

biology. 1964;7: 17–52. 

2.  Okasha S. The Units and Levels of Selection. A Companion to the Philosophy of Biology. 

John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2007. pp. 138–156. doi:10.1002/9780470696590.ch8 

3.  Joshi CH, Wiens JJ. Does haplodiploidy help drive the evolution of insect eusociality? 

Front Ecol Evol. 2023;11. doi:10.3389/fevo.2023.1118748 

4.  Wilson EO. The insect societies. Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge, Mass.  : Belknap Press of 

Harvard University Press; 1971. 

5.  Garnier S, Gautrais J, Theraulaz G. The biological principles of swarm intelligence. 

Swarm Intell. 2007;1: 3–31. doi:10.1007/s11721-007-0004-y 

6.  Leonhardt SD, Menzel F, Nehring V, Schmitt T. Ecology and Evolution of 

Communication in Social Insects. Cell. 2016;164: 1277–1287. 

doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.035 

39 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7.  Biesmeijer JC, De Vries H. Exploration and exploitation of food sources by social insect 

colonies: a revision of the scout-recruit concept. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 

2001;49: 89–99. doi:10.1007/s002650000289 

8.  Dornhaus A. Finding Food: Foraging Affects All Aspects of an Animal’s Life. Animal 

Behavior. Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.; 2014. pp. 1–22. Available: 

http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?scp=85210839445&partnerID=8YFLogxK 

9.  Hills TT, Todd PM, Lazer D, Redish AD, Couzin ID. Exploration versus exploitation in 

space, mind, and society. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2015;19: 46–54. 

doi:10.1016/j.tics.2014.10.004 

10.  Popp S, Dornhaus A. Collective search in ants: Movement determines footprints, and 

footprints influence movement. PLOS ONE. 2024;19: e0299432. 

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0299432 

11.  Dornhaus A, Powell S. Foraging and Defence Strategies. In: Lach L, Parr C, Abbott K, 

editors. Ant Ecology. Oxford University Press; 2009. pp. 210–230. 

doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199544639.003.0012 

12.  Lanan M. Spatiotemporal resource distribution and foraging strategies of ants 

(Hymenoptera: Formicidae). 2014. 

13.  Green DM, Swets JA. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. Wiley New York; 1966. 

Available: 

http://andrei.gorea.free.fr/Teaching_fichiers/SDT%20and%20Psytchophysics.pdf 

40 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14.  Cheng K, Wignall AE. Honeybees (Apis mellifera) holding on to memories: response 

competition causes retroactive interference effects. Anim Cogn. 2006;9: 141–150. 

doi:10.1007/s10071-005-0012-5 

15.  Hunt KL, Chittka L. Merging of Long-Term Memories in an Insect. Current Biology. 

2015;25: 741–745. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.023 

16.  Wenig K, Bach R, Czaczkes TJ. Hard limits to cognitive flexibility: ants can learn to 

ignore but not avoid pheromone trails. Journal of Experimental Biology. 2021;224: 

jeb242454. doi:10.1242/jeb.242454 

17.  Brumm H. Animal communication and noise. Springer; 2013. 

18.  Internicola AI, Page PA, Bernasconi G, Gigord LDB. Carry-over effects of bumblebee 

associative learning in changing plant communities leads to increased costs of foraging. 

Arthropod-Plant Interactions. 2009;3: 17–26. doi:10.1007/s11829-008-9051-6 

19.  Heiling AM, Herberstein ME, Chittka L. Crab-spiders manipulate flower signals. Nature. 

2003;421: 334–334. doi:10.1038/421334a 

20.  Keasar T, Motro U, Shur Y, Shmida A. Overnight memory retention of foraging skills by 

bumblebees is imperfect. Animal Behaviour. 1996;52: 95–104. 

doi:10.1006/anbe.1996.0155 

21.  Saar M, Gilad T, Kilon-Kallner T, Rosenfeld A, Subach A, Scharf I. The interplay 

between maze complexity, colony size, learning and memory in ants while solving a maze: 

41 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

A test at the colony level. PLOS ONE. 2017;12: e0183753. 

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0183753 

22.  Deneubourg JL, Pasteels JM, Verhaeghe JC. Probabilistic behaviour in ants: A strategy of 

errors? Journal of Theoretical Biology. 1983;105: 259–271. 

doi:10.1016/S0022-5193(83)80007-1 

23.  Preece K, Beekman M. Honeybee waggle dance error: adaption or constraint? Unravelling 

the complex dance language of honeybees. Animal Behaviour. 2014;94: 19–26. 

doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2014.05.016 

24.  Giraldeau L, Valone TJ, Templeton JJ. Potential disadvantages of using socially acquired 

information. Johnstone RA, Dall SRX, editors. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B. 2002;357: 

1559–1566. doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1065 

25.  McCormick JS, White TE, Middleton EJT, Latty T. Information cascades spread adaptive 

and maladaptive behaviours in group-living animals. Animal Behaviour. 2024;209: 53–62. 

doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2023.12.007 

26.  Beauchamp G. Determinants of false alarms in staging flocks of semipalmated sandpipers. 

Behavioral Ecology. 2010;21: 584–587. doi:10.1093/beheco/arq032 

27.  Hamel JA, Cocroft RB. Negative feedback from maternal signals reduces false alarms by 

collectively signalling offspring. Proc R Soc B. 2012;279: 3820–3826. 

doi:10.1098/rspb.2012.1181 

42 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28.  Gray L, Webster MM. False alarms and information transmission in grouping animals. 

Biological Reviews. 2023;98: 833–848. doi:10.1111/brv.12932 

29.  Lanan MC, Dornhaus A, Jones EI, Waser A, Bronstein JL. The Trail Less Traveled: 

Individual Decision-Making and Its Effect on Group Behavior. PLOS ONE. 2012;7: 

e47976. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0047976 

30.  Sasaki T, Pratt SC. The Psychology of Superorganisms: Collective Decision Making by 

Insect Societies. Annu Rev Entomol. 2018;63: 259–275. 

doi:10.1146/annurev-ento-020117-043249 

31.  Karlson P, Lüscher M. ‘Pheromones’: a New Term for a Class of Biologically Active 

Substances. Nature. 1959;183: 55–56. doi:10.1038/183055a0 

32.  Dong S, Lin T, Nieh JC, Tan K. Social signal learning of the waggle dance in honey bees. 

Science. 2023;379: 1015–1018. doi:10.1126/science.ade1702 

33.  Moore D, Liebig J. Innate and learned components of egg recognition in the ant 

Camponotus floridanus . R Soc Open Sci. 2024;11: 231837. doi:10.1098/rsos.231837 

34.  Beckers R, Deneubourg JL, Goss S, Pasteels JM. Collective decision making through food 

recruitment. Ins Soc. 1990;37: 258–267. doi:10.1007/BF02224053 

35.  Schmidt VM, P. Schorkopf DL, Hrncir M, Zucchi R, Barth FG. Collective foraging in a 

stingless bee: dependence on food profitability and sequence of discovery. Animal 

Behaviour. 2006;72: 1309–1317. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2006.03.023 

43 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36.  Price RI, Grüter C, Hughes WOH, Evison SEF. Symmetry breaking in mass-recruiting 

ants: extent of foraging biases depends on resource quality. Behav Ecol Sociobiol. 

2016;70: 1813–1820. doi:10.1007/s00265-016-2187-y 

37.  Biesmeijer JC, Seeley TD. The use of waggle dance information by honey bees 

throughout their foraging careers. Behav Ecol Sociobiol. 2005;59: 133–142. 

doi:10.1007/s00265-005-0019-6 

38.  Evans LJ, Raine NE. Foraging errors play a role in resource exploration by bumble bees 

(Bombus terrrestris). J Comp Physiol A. 2014;200: 475–484. 

doi:10.1007/s00359-014-0905-3 

39.  Goy N, Glaser SM, Grüter C. The adaptive value of tandem communication in ants: 

Insights from an agent-based model. Journal of Theoretical Biology. 2021;526: 110762. 

doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2021.110762 

40.  Aswale A, Lopez A, Ammartayakun A, Pinciroli C. Hacking the Colony: On the 

Disruptive Effect of Misleading Pheromone and How to Defend Against It. arXiv; 2022. 

Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.01808 

41.  Cook Z, Franks DW, Robinson EJH. Exploration versus exploitation in polydomous ant 

colonies. Journal of Theoretical Biology. 2013;323: 49–56. doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2013.01.022 

42.  Shackleton K, Balfour NJ, Al Toufailia H, James E, Ratnieks FLW. Honey bee waggle 

dances facilitate shorter foraging distances and increased foraging aggregation. Animal 

Behaviour. 2023;198: 11–19. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2023.01.009 

44 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43.  Grüter C, Czaczkes TJ, Ratnieks FLW. Decision making in ant foragers (Lasius niger) 

facing conflicting private and social information. Behav Ecol Sociobiol. 2011;65: 

141–148. doi:10.1007/s00265-010-1020-2 

44.  Wray MK, Klein BA, Seeley TD. Honey bees use social information in waggle dances 

more fully when foraging errors are more costly. Behavioral Ecology. 2012;23: 125–131. 

doi:10.1093/beheco/arr165 

45.  Dunlap AS, Nielsen ME, Dornhaus A, Papaj DR. Foraging Bumble Bees Weigh the 

Reliability of Personal and Social Information. Current Biology. 2016;26: 1195–1199. 

doi:10.1016/J.CUB.2016.03.009 

46.  Smolla M, Alem S, Chittka L, Shultz S. Copy-when-uncertain: bumblebees rely on social 

information when rewards are highly variable. Biology Letters. 2016;12: 20160188. 

doi:10.1098/rsbl.2016.0188 

47.  Jones S, Czaczkes TJ, Gallager AJ, Oberhauser FB, Gourlay E, Bacon JP. Copy when 

uncertain: lower light levels increase trail pheromone depositing and reliance on 

pheromone trails in ants. Animal Behaviour. 2019;156: 87–95. 

doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2019.08.007 

48.  Tanner DA, Visscher PK. Do honey bees average directions in the waggle dance to 

determine a flight direction? Behav Ecol Sociobiol. 2008;62: 1891–1898. 

doi:10.1007/s00265-008-0619-z 

45 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

49.  Kulahci IG, Dornhaus A, Papaj DR. Multimodal signals enhance decision making in 

foraging bumble-bees. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 

2008;275: 797–802. doi:10.1098/rspb.2007.1176 

50.  Harrap MJM, Hempel de Ibarra N, Whitney HM, Rands SA. Floral temperature patterns 

can function as floral guides. Arthropod-Plant Interactions. 2020;14: 193–206. 

doi:10.1007/s11829-020-09742-z 

51.  Johnson RA. Learning, Memory, and Foraging Efficiency in Two Species of Desert 

Seed-Harvester Ants. Ecology. 1991;72: 1408–1419. doi:10.2307/1941112 

52.  Czaczkes TJ, Grüter C, Jones SM, Ratnieks FLW. Synergy between social and private 

information increases foraging efficiency in ants. Biology Letters. 2011;7: 521–524. 

doi:10.1098/rsbl.2011.0067 

53.  Czaczkes TJ, Heinze J. Ants adjust their pheromone deposition to a changing environment 

and their probability of making errors. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological 

Sciences. 2015;282. doi:10.1098/rspb.2015.0679 

54.  Robinson EJH, Jackson DE, Holcombe M, Ratnieks FLW. ‘No entry’ signal in ant 

foraging. Nature. 2005;438: 442–442. doi:10.1038/438442a 

55.  Borofsky T, Barranca VJ, Zhou R, von Trentini D, Broadrup RL, Mayack C. Hive minded: 

like neurons, honey bees collectively integrate negative feedback to regulate decisions. 

Animal Behaviour. 2020;168: 33–44. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2020.07.023 

46 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

56.  Wendt S, Kleinhoelting N, Czaczkes TJ. Negative feedback: Ants choose unoccupied over 

occupied food sources and lay more pheromone to them. Journal of the Royal Society 

Interface. 2020;17. doi:10.1098/RSIF.2019.0661 

57.  Mehlhorn K, Newell BR, Todd PM, Lee MD, Morgan K, Braithwaite VA, et al. 

Unpacking the exploration–exploitation tradeoff: A synthesis of human and animal 

literatures. Decision. 2015;2: 191–215. doi:10.1037/dec0000033 

58.  Charbonneau D, Blonder B, Dornhaus A. Social Insects: A Model System for Network 

Dynamics. In: Holme P, Saramäki J, editors. Temporal Networks. Berlin, Heidelberg: 

Springer; 2013. pp. 217–244. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-36461-7_11 

59.  Wilson RC, Geana A, White JM, Ludvig EA, Cohen JD. Humans use directed and random 

exploration to solve the explore–exploit dilemma. Journal of experimental psychology: 

General. 2014;143: 2074. 

60.  Wilson RC, Bonawitz E, Costa VD, Ebitz RB. Balancing exploration and exploitation 

with information and randomization. Current opinion in behavioral sciences. 2021;38: 

49–56. 

61.  Levin D, Hecker JP, Moses ME, Forrest S. Volatility and spatial distribution of resources 

determine ant foraging strategies. Artificial Life Conference Proceedings. MIT Press One 

Rogers Street, Cambridge, MA 02142-1209, USA journals-info …; 2015. pp. 256–263. 

62.  Roylance D. Stress-strain curves. Massachusetts Institute of Technology study, 

Cambridge. 2001 [cited 15 June 2025]. Available: 

47 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

https://resources.saylor.org/wwwresources/archived/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/ME1 

022.2.4.pdf 

63.  Memmott J, Waser NM, Price MV. Tolerance of Pollination Networks to Species 

Extinctions. Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 2004;271: 2605–2611. 

64.  Masel J, Siegal ML. Robustness: mechanisms and consequences. Trends in Genetics. 

2009;25: 395–403. doi:10.1016/j.tig.2009.07.005 

65.  Walsh MM, Einstein EH, Gluck KA. A quantification of robustness. Journal of Applied 

Research in Memory and Cognition. 2013;2: 137–148. doi:10.1016/j.jarmac.2013.07.002 

66.  Dornhaus A, Klügl F, Oechslein C, Puppe F, Chittka L. Benefits of recruitment in honey 

bees: effects of ecology and colony size in an individual-based model. Behavioral 

Ecology. 2006;17: 336–344. doi:10.1093/beheco/arj036 

67.  Beekman M, Lew JB. Foraging in honeybees—when does it pay to dance? Behavioral 

Ecology. 2008;19: 255–261. doi:10.1093/beheco/arm117 

68.  Letendre K, Moses ME. Synergy in ant foraging strategies: memory and communication 

alone and in combination. Proceedings of the 15th annual conference on Genetic and 

evolutionary computation. Amsterdam The Netherlands: ACM; 2013. pp. 41–48. 

doi:10.1145/2463372.2463389 

69.  Czaczkes TJ, Czaczkes B, Iglhaut C, Heinze J. Composite collective decision-making. 

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 2015;282: 20142723. 

doi:10.1098/rspb.2014.2723 

48 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

70.  Robinson SVJ, Hoover SE, Pernal SF, Cartar RV. Optimal distributions of central-place 

foragers: honey bee foraging in a mass flowering crop. Behav Ecol. 2022;33: 386–397. 

doi:10.1093/beheco/arab143 

71.  Grüter C, Schürch R, Czaczkes TJ, Taylor K, Durance T, Jones SM, et al. Negative 

Feedback Enables Fast and Flexible Collective Decision-Making in Ants. PLOS ONE. 

2012;7: e44501. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0044501 

72.  Schmolke A. Benefits of Dispersed Central ‐Place Foraging: An Individual ‐Based Model 

of a Polydomous Ant Colony. The American Naturalist. 2009;173: 772–778. 

doi:10.1086/598493 

73.  Marshall JAR, Dornhaus A, Franks NR, Kovacs T. Noise, cost and speed-accuracy 

trade-offs: decision-making in a decentralized system. J R Soc Interface. 2006;3: 243–254. 

doi:10.1098/rsif.2005.0075 

74.  Schürch R, Grüter C. Dancing Bees Improve Colony Foraging Success as Long-Term 

Benefits Outweigh Short-Term Costs. PLOS ONE. 2014;9: e104660. 

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0104660 

75.  Tisue S, Wilensky U. Netlogo: A simple environment for modeling complexity. 

International conference on complex systems. Citeseer; 2004. pp. 16–21. 

76.  Czaczkes TJ, Grüter C, Ratnieks FLW. Trail Pheromones: An Integrative View of Their 

Role in Social Insect Colony Organization. 

https://doi.org/101146/annurev-ento-010814-020627. 2015;60: 581–599. 

doi:10.1146/ANNUREV-ENTO-010814-020627 

49 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

77.  Frisch K von. Dance language and orientation of bees. 1967. 

78.  R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for 

Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL: https://www.R-project.org/Accessed 23 

September, 2024. Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. 2024. 

79.  Dowle M, Srinivasan A, Gorecki J, Chirico M, Stetsenko P, Short T, et al. Package ‘data. 

table.’ Extension of ‘data frame. 2019;596: 368. 

80.  Ogle D, Ogle MD. Package ‘fsa.’ Cran Repos. 2017; 1–206. 

81.  Mangiafico S. Package ‘rcompanion.’ Cran Repos. 2017;20: 1–71. 

82.  Wickham H, Pedersen TL, Seidel D, Software P, PBC [cph, fnd. scales: Scale Functions 

for Visualization. 2025. Available: 

https://cloud.r-project.org/web/packages/scales/index.html 

83.  Wickham H, Averick M, Bryan J, Chang W, McGowan L, François R, et al. Welcome to 

the Tidyverse. JOSS. 2019;4: 1686. doi:10.21105/joss.01686 

84.  Garnier S, Ross N, Rudis B, Sciaini M, Camargo AP, Scherer C. Package ‘viridis.’ 

Website: https://cran r-project org/package= viridis. 2021 [cited 1 Jan 2025]. Available: 

http://cran.fhcrc.org/web/packages/viridis/viridis.pdf 

85.  Grimm V, Berger U, Bastiansen F, Eliassen S, Ginot V, Giske J, et al. A standard protocol 

for describing individual-based and agent-based models. Ecological Modelling. 2006;198: 

115–126. doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2006.04.023 

50 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

86.  Grimm V, Berger U, DeAngelis DL, Polhill JG, Giske J, Railsback SF. The ODD protocol: 

A review and first update. Ecological Modelling. 2010;221: 2760–2768. 

doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2010.08.019 

87.  Grimm V, Railsback SF, Vincenot CE, Berger U, Gallagher C, DeAngelis DL, et al. The 

ODD Protocol for Describing Agent-Based and Other Simulation Models: A Second 

Update to Improve Clarity, Replication, and Structural Realism. JASSS. 2020;23: 7. 

doi:10.18564/jasss.4259 

88.  Carlson JM, Doyle J. Complexity and robustness. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002;99: 

2538–2545. doi:10.1073/pnas.012582499 

89.  Hopfe C, Ospina-Jara B, Schulze T, Tischer M, Morales D, Reinhartz V, et al. Impact of 

environmental factors on spider silk properties. Current Biology. 2024;34: 56-67.e5. 

doi:10.1016/j.cub.2023.11.043 

90.  Dukas R, Morse DH. Crab spiders affect flower visitation by bees. Oikos. 2003;101: 

157–163. doi:10.1034/j.1600-0706.2003.12143.x 

91.  Ings TC, Chittka L. Speed-Accuracy Tradeoffs and False Alarms in Bee Responses to 

Cryptic Predators. Current Biology. 2008;18: 1520–1524. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2008.07.074 

92.  Johnson DDP, Blumstein DT, Fowler JH, Haselton MG. The evolution of error: error 

management, cognitive constraints, and adaptive decision-making biases. Trends in 

Ecology & Evolution. 2013;28: 474–481. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2013.05.014 

51 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

93.  Dornhaus A, Smith B, Hristova K, Buckley LB. How Can We Fully Realize the Potential 

of Mathematical and Biological Models to Reintegrate Biology? Integrative and 

Comparative Biology. 2022;61: 2244–2254. doi:10.1093/icb/icab142 

94.  Masel J, Dornhaus A. What good is modeling? Introducing biology students to theory. 

arXiv; 2026. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2604.13344 

95.  Ioannidis JPA. Why Most Published Research Findings Are False. PLOS Medicine. 

2005;2: e124. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124 

96.  Ward A, Webster M. Sociality: The Behaviour of Group-Living Animals. Cham: Springer 

International Publishing; 2016. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-28585-6 

97.  Feinerman O, Korman A. Individual versus collective cognition in social insects. Levine 

JD, Kronauer DJC, Dickinson MH, editors. Journal of Experimental Biology. 2017;220: 

73–82. doi:10.1242/jeb.143891 

98.  Chittka L, Rossi N. Social cognition in insects. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2022;26: 

578–592. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2022.04.001 

99.  Seeley TD. Honey bee foragers as sensory units of their colonies. Behav Ecol Sociobiol. 

1994;34: 51–62. doi:10.1007/BF00175458 

100.  Dornhaus A, Chittka L. Why do honey bees dance? Behav Ecol Sociobiol. 2004;55: 

395–401. doi:10.1007/s00265-003-0726-9 

52 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

101.  Lemanski NJ, Cook CN, Ozturk C, Smith BH, Pinter-Wollman N. The effect of individual 

learning on collective foraging in honey bees in differently structured landscapes. Animal 

Behaviour. 2021;179: 113–123. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2021.06.033 

102.  Grüter C, Farina WM. The honeybee waggle dance: can we follow the steps? Trends in 

Ecology & Evolution. 2009;24: 242–247. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2008.12.007 

103.  Donaldson-Matasci MC, Dornhaus A. How habitat affects the benefits of communication 

in collectively foraging honey bees. Behav Ecol Sociobiol. 2012;66: 583–592. 

doi:10.1007/s00265-011-1306-z 

104.  Dechaume-Moncharmont F-X, Dornhaus A, Houston AI, McNamara JM, Collins EJ, 

Franks NR. The hidden cost of information in collective foraging. Proceedings of the 

Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 2005;272: 1689–1695. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3137 

105.  Dornhaus A, Collins EJ, Dechaume-Moncharmont F-X, Houston AI, Franks NR, 

McNamara JM. Paying for information: partial loads in central place foragers. Behav Ecol 

Sociobiol. 2006;61: 151–161. doi:10.1007/s00265-006-0246-5 

106.  Beekman M, Ratnieks FLW. Long-range foraging by the honey-bee, Apis mellifera L. 

Functional Ecology. 2000;14: 490–496. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2435.2000.00443.x 

107.  Donaldson-Matasci M, Dornhaus A. Dance Communication Affects Consistency, but Not 

Breadth, of Resource Use in Pollen-Foraging Honey Bees. PLOS ONE. 2014;9: e107527. 

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0107527 

53 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

108.  Fahimipour AK, Gil MA, Celis MR, Hein GF, Martin BT, Hein AM. Wild animals 

suppress the spread of socially transmitted misinformation. Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences. 2023;120: e2215428120. doi:10.1073/pnas.2215428120 

109.  Tump AN, Pleskac TJ, Kurvers RHJM. Wise or mad crowds? The cognitive mechanisms 

underlying information cascades. Science Advances. 2020;6: eabb0266. 

doi:10.1126/sciadv.abb0266 

110.  Tokita CK, Guess AM, Tarnita CE. Polarized information ecosystems can reorganize 

social networks via information cascades. Proceedings of the National Academy of 

Sciences. 2021;118: e2102147118. doi:10.1073/pnas.2102147118 

111.  Pratt SC. Quorum sensing by encounter rates in the ant Temnothorax albipennis. 

Behavioral Ecology. 2005;16: 488–496. 

112.  Weidenmüller A, Seeley TD. Imprecision in waggle dances of the honeybee (Apis 

mellifera) for nearby food sources: error or adaptation? Behav Ecol Sociobiol. 1999;46: 

190–199. doi:10.1007/s002650050609 

113.  Franks NR, Pratt SC, Mallon EB, Britton NF, Sumpter DJT. Information flow, opinion 

polling and collective intelligence in house–hunting social insects. Johnstone RA, Dall 

SRX, editors. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B. 2002;357: 1567–1583. 

doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1066 

114.  Donaldson-Matasci MC, DeGrandi-Hoffman G, Dornhaus A. Bigger is better: honeybee 

colonies as distributed information-gathering systems. Animal Behaviour. 2013;85: 

585–592. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2012.12.020 

54 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

115.  Franks NR, Dornhaus A, Fitzsimmons JP, Stevens M. Speed versus Accuracy in 

Collective Decision Making. Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 2003;270: 2457–2463. 

116.  Dornhaus A, Franks NR, Hawkins RM, Shere HNS. Ants move to improve: colonies of 

Leptothorax albipennis emigrate whenever they find a superior nest site. Animal 

Behaviour. 2004;67: 959–963. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2003.09.004 

117.  Dornhaus A, Chittka L. Information flow and regulation of foraging activityin bumble 

bees ( Bombus spp.). Apidologie. 2004;35: 183–192. doi:10.1051/apido:2004002 

118.  Dornhaus A, Chittka L. Why do honey bees dance? Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 

2004;55: 395–401. 

119.  Bengston SE, Dornhaus A. Colony size does not predict foraging distance in the ant 

Temnothorax rugatulus: a puzzle for standard scaling models. Insect Soc. 2013;60: 93–96. 

doi:10.1007/s00040-012-0272-4 

120.  Popp S, Dornhaus A. Ants combine systematic meandering and correlated random walks 

when searching for unknown resources. iScience. 2023;26: 105916. 

doi:10.1016/j.isci.2022.105916 

121.  Popp S, Dornhaus A. Collective search in ants: Movement determines footprints, and 

footprints influence movement. PLOS ONE. 2024;19: e0299432. 

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0299432 

55 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.12.738017 doi: bioRxiv preprint

122.  Beekman M, Sumpter DJT, Ratnieks FLW. Phase transition between disordered and 

ordered foraging in Pharaoh’s ants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 

2001;98: 9703–9706. doi:10.1073/pnas.161285298 

123.  Cerdá X, Arnan X, Retana J. Is competition a significant hallmark of ant (Hymenoptera: 

Formicidae) ecology. Myrmecological News. 2013;18: 131–147. 

124.  Dornhaus A. Finding optimal collective strategies using individual-based simulations: 

colony organization in social insects. Mathematical and Computer Modelling of 

Dynamical Systems. 2012;18: 25–37. doi:10.1080/13873954.2011.601422 

125.  de Vries H, Biesmeijer JC. Modelling collective foraging by means of individual 

behaviour rules in honey-bees. Behav Ecol Sociobiol. 1998;44: 109–124. 

doi:10.1007/s002650050522 

126.  Sumpter D, Pratt S. A modelling framework for understanding social insect foraging. 

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 2003;53: 131–144. 

127.  Hardy GH. Mendelian Proportions in a Mixed Population. Science. 1908;28: 49–50. 

doi:10.1126/science.28.706.49 

56